[comgr] Remove fixed flag for SPIR-V code generation and register the SPIRV-V backend. (#1814)
ROCm/llvm-project: amd/comgr/README.md

`llvm/projects` or `llvm/tools` and build using the above instructions, with the
exception that the `-DCMAKE_PREFIX_PATH` for llvm-project must be an install
path (specified with `-DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=/path/to/install/dir` and populated
with `make install`) rather than the build path. Minimal SPIRV support requires
that the translator be found when configuring Comgr. At configure time Comgr
detects translator and backend independently, and `-DCOMGR_DISABLE_SPIRV` is the
only Comgr CMake option for SPIR-V.

Comgr SPIRV-related APIs can be disabled by passing
`-DCOMGR_DISABLE_SPIRV=1` during the Comgr `cmake` step. This removes any
dependency on LLVM SPIRV libraries, the llvm-spirv tool or the SPIRV backend in LLVM.

> If `-DCOMGR_DISABLE_SPIRV=0` is set, Comgr will have the SPIR-V backend available

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `-DCOMGR_DISABLE_SPIRV` is unset or set to zero, Comgr will have the SPIR-V backend available
```

Comgr SPIRV-related APIs can be disabled by passing
`-DCOMGR_DISABLE_SPIRV=1` during the Comgr `cmake` step. This removes any
dependency on LLVM SPIRV libraries, the llvm-spirv tool or the SPIRV backend in LLVM.

> If `-DCOMGR_DISABLE_SPIRV=0` is set, the LLVM build must include the SPIRV backend

Reviewer 2: Would need to update README in the context of the new VARS

Comgr SPIRV-related APIs can be disabled by passing
`-DCOMGR_DISABLE_SPIRV=1` during the Comgr `cmake` step. This removes any
dependency on LLVM SPIRV libraries or the llvm-spirv tool.

> If `-DCOMGR_DISABLE_SPIRV=1` is set, the LLVM build must include the SPIR-V backend

Reviewer 3: I'm about sure that you can emit a warning in cmake instead (at least for in-tree builds, which should be the only kind of build in an ideal world).

Author: Do you mean a warning if the LLVM build doesn't contain the SPIR-V target?

Also, is comgr an in-tree build? I thought that it wasn't because it is not build while building LLVM. Sorry if I miss anything.

Reviewer 3: I meant to fail with a FATAL_ERROR if we're building Comgr and the backend is needed but not enabled, cause compilation is going to fail anyways.

> Also, is comgr an in-tree build?

Arghhhh! We still don't!

> If `-DCOMGR_DISABLE_SPIRV=1` is set, the LLVM build must include the SPIR-V backend

Reviewer 3: I think you'll have to mention the translator in these comments. Cause the confusion score is high when `COMGR_DISABLE_SPIRV=1` means you must include the SPIRV backend.

Reviewer 3: Or have yet another variable. `COMGR_SPIRV_BACKEND=Translator/LLVM`

Author: I see your point. A new variable looks good to me, however, I don't think they are necessarily mutually exclusive, right? 

The flag should only be used to conditionally register the SPIR-V backend. My point is that having the two enabled for SPIR-V code generation looks as something we will want to have for some time. Also, by default it should be disabled to avoid a breaking change. What do you think (also @lamb-j)?

Author: @lamb-j does the PSDB build the SPIR-V backend? I think we will find out if the test fails but just to check.

Reviewer 2: I am generally against new CMAKE build variables, especially ones that may have dependencies with existing ones.

>  I don't think they are necessarily mutually exclusive, right?

+1.

> If `-DCOMGR_DISABLE_SPIRV=1` is set, the LLVM build must include the SPIR-V backend

Could you provide some context ? If we are disabling SPIRV in Comgr, why do we want to build its LLVM backend?

Author: > If `-DCOMGR_DISABLE_SPIRV=1` is set, the LLVM build must include the SPIR-V backend

@chinmaydd thanks for spotting this, it is a mistake on my side. I mean:

> If `-DCOMGR_DISABLE_SPIRV=0` is set, the LLVM build must include the SPIR-V backend

Reviewer: I'm tempted to just switch switch COMGR_DISABLE_SPIRV to COMGR_ENABLE_SPIRV. That's what it was originally (and some asked to switch it to a "Disable" flag instead). But it's mostly just confusing

So far, "COMGR_DISABLE_SPIRV" guards against cases where we don't have access to the SPIRV Translator. As a mechanism to use in cases where people wanted to build and use Comgr, but don't care about SPIRV and don't want to clone the translator.

In the same way, we could expand it to guard against needing the LLVM SPIRV libs. Or we could just require the SPIRV target to be built to use Comgr. We're going to need to do that almost everywhere anyways, because we aren't using COMGR_DISABLE_SPIRV anywhere that I know of. A user out there will already have all the sources needed for the LLVM SPIRV lib. (compared to the translator, that's an additional dependency). 

What's the overhead of building LLVM with -DLLVM_TARGETS_TO_BUILD="SPIRV"? I'm assuming it doesn't inflate the library size in any meaningful way?

> Or have yet another variable. COMGR_SPIRV_BACKEND=Translator/LLVM
I like this just for debugging purposes as we bring up the backend. I think a follow up patch adding this, and updating SOURCE_TO_SPIRV to branch on this would be nice

Reviewer: Overall glad you raised this patch, it's shaking out some issues. Mainly that we need to go through and add -DLLVM_TARGETS_TO_BUILD="SPIRV" to TheRock and our PSDBs if it isn't already there

Reviewer 2: > We're going to need to do that almost everywhere anyways, because we aren't using COMGR_DISABLE_SPIRV anywhere that I know of

https://github.com/ROCm/TheRock/blob/main/compiler/CMakeLists.txt#L166

But the spirv-llvm-translator repository is available to TheRock and should be possible to build.

Note, however, that changing the name of the flag would also require changing it as part of downstream build systems.

Reviewer 3: Ok, no... I was very shortsighted.

In fact its not a one or the other situation... its both or none.

If we compile with the SPIRV backend and without the translator, we may generate SPIRV... but we cannot execute it; which would be unexpected.

Author: > A user out there will already have all the sources needed for the LLVM SPIRV lib. (compared to the translator, that's an additional dependency).

+1 true

> Note, however, that changing the name of the flag would also require changing it as part of downstream build systems.

also +1 --- maybe we should aim for a not so invasive change 

I'll think a bit more about it but overall expecting that the SPIRV target is available in the LLVM build if "SPIRV support" is enabled in comgr makes sense to me.

> What's the overhead of building LLVM with -DLLVM_TARGETS_TO_BUILD="SPIRV"? I'm assuming it doesn't inflate the library size in any meaningful way?

I'll check this too.

Thank you all for the feedback!

Author: > What's the overhead of building LLVM with -DLLVM_TARGETS_TO_BUILD="SPIRV"?

Statically linked clang (`-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=RelWithDebInfo`):

- `-DLLVM_TARGETS_TO_BUILD="X86;AMDGPU;SPIRV"` 4701MB
- `-DLLVM_TARGETS_TO_BUILD="X86;AMDGPU"` 4621MB

I think it is a reasonable overhead.
